                TS2 68000 Computer Theory Of Operation
                ======================================

This description is based on the "Design Example Using the 68000"
section of the book "Microprocessor Systems Design 68000 Hardware,
Software, and Interfacing", third edition, by Alan Clements. It has
been adjusted to reflect my modified design. Refer to the schematic
diagram when reading the following sections.

Specifications of the TS2
-------------------------

1.  The TS2 uses an 8 MHz 68000 CPU.

2.  It is built on a single circuit board.

3.  The CPU card is capable of operating on its own. System testing is
    thus facilitated because other modules are not required to operate
    the CPU card in a stand-alone mode.

4.  The original TS2 provided an external bus. This was omitted in my
    design as it was not required and reduced the chip count
    considerably.

5.  The memory on the CPU card is static RAM and EPROM/EEPROM to avoid
    the complexity and associated difficulty of debugging dynamic RAM
    circuitry.

6.  Full seven-level interrupt facilities are provided, but are
    optional. If included, these can support a level 7 interrupt
    (abort) switch, interrupts from the two ACIAs, and external
    interrupts.

7.  Full address decoding is provided. The address space is compatible
    with the Motorola MEX68KECB Educational Computer Board (ECB)
    development system in order to facilitate the transfer of software
    between the TS2 and ECB.

8.  The vector table at $00000000 to $000003FF is implemented in RAM,
    with the exception of the reset vectors which are mapped to the
    first 8 bytes of ROM (this is described in more detail later).

9.  The RAM is implemented by 8Kx8 CMOS devices to minimize the
    component count.

10. The ROM is implemented by 2764 type 8Kx8 EPROMs or 2864 type 8Kx8
    EEPROMs (or equivalent CMOS devices).

11. The terminal (console) interface is through a serial port. A
    secondary port is also provided. Configuration is the same as in
    the ECB development system.

12. The module's local address and data buses have not been buffered
    as the CPU has adequate fanout.

An additional goal was to replicate the original Teesside TS computer
using parts of its era, so no significant design changes were made to
use a more modern approach like PALs, GALs, ULAs, etc.

Top Level Schematic (schematic page 1)
--------------------------------------

Each IC has a 0.1 uF ceramic bypass capacitor across the Vcc and
ground pins. A single 100 uF capacitor provides additional power
supply filtering. It requires a +5 volt supply. A switch controls
power and a green LED (D2) indicates power on. Power can come from the
external supply or from one of the two USB to serial ports on page 8.

Diode D3 provides protection against reversed power supply polarity.

The majority of chips are 7400 series LS family TTL devices. There are
a few spare gates. Their inputs are grounded as per standard TTL
design practice.

Reset, Halt, and Clock Control Circuits (schematic page 2)
----------------------------------------------------------

Every CPU requires a certain amount of basic control circuitry to
enable it to operate -- this circuitry includes its clock, reset,
halt, and similar functions. Such circuitry can be designed largely
independently of the rest of the system and is needed to perform even
the simplest tests on the CPU. Therefore, we will design these
circuits first.

Page 2 gives the diagram of the control circuitry surrounding the
68000, excluding the interrupt request inputs. The control of HALT*
and RESET* is conventional. At power-on, a 555 timer configured as a
monostable, U1, generates a single active-high pulse.

Open-collector buffers, U4C and U4D, apply the reset pulse to the
68000's RESET* and HALT* inputs, respectively. A manual reset
generator is formed from two cross-coupled NAND gates, U3A and U3B,
and applied to the reset lines by a further two open-collector
buffers, U4A and U4B. An inverting buffer, U5A, gates the reset pulse
from U1 onto the system bus as the active-low POR* (Power On Reset).
This signal is used by other modules to clear circuits on power-up.

An LED, D1, is connected to the HALT* pin via a buffer. This LED is
fitted to the front panel and confirms the reset operation. It also
shows if the CPU has asserted HALT* because of a double bus fault.

The 68000 clock input is provided by an 8 MHz crystal-controlled clock
in a DIP package. If desired, a lower speed clock oscillator can be
used either for test purposes or to allow using a lower-speed 68000
chip.

The high impedance control circuits shown on page 1 are pulled up to
Vcc by resistors. Although pullup resistors are necessary on BR*,
DTACK*, etc., the reader may be surprised to find them on AS*, UDS*,
LDS*, and R/W*. They are required here because these pins are driven
by tristate outputs in the 68000. When the 68000 relinquishes the bus
all tristate lines are floated. To leave the state of these bus lines
undefined is unwise, as a spurious bus cycle might possibly be
generated in certain circumstances. A better course is to be safe
rather than sorry. During the testing phase, some of the pullup
resistors were temporary and used only for testing purposes, because
they were connected to lines that will later be pulled up or down by
totem-pole outputs. They appear so that the circuit can be tested
independently of the rest of the system.

Testing the CPU control circuitry is very easy. The power on reset
circuit is tested by attaching an oscilloscope probe to test point 1
(TP1), switching on the Vcc power supply, and observing the
positive-going pulse. A negative-going pulse should be observed at the
CPU's RESET* and HALT* pins. The manual reset pulse generator should
force HALT* and RESET* low whenever the reset button is pushed.

An 8 MHz square wave should be observed at the CLK input to the CPU.
All inputs pulled up to a logical 1 should be at a logical 1 state.

The next step is to install the 68000 and force the CPU to free-run.
As no memory components have yet been fitted, the CPU must be fooled
into thinking that it is executing valid bus cycles. To do this,
DTACK* is temporarily connected to the AS* output. Whenever the 68000
starts a memory access by asserting AS*, DTACK* is automatically
asserted to complete the cycle.

The 68000 is a tricky beast to test in a free-running mode, because it
generates an exception if an invalid op-code is detected. Should the
68000 then generate a second exception, the resulting bus fault will
cause it to halt. Therefore, the 68000 must always see a valid op-code
on its data bus. One way of doing this is to pull up (or down) the
data bus lines with resistors to Vcc (or ground). Traditionally, CPUs
are tested by placing a NOP (no operation) op-code on the data bus.
The 68000 NOP code is $4E71 (i.e. %0100 1110 0111 0001). If this code
is jammed onto the data bus, the 68000 will also use it for the stack
pointer and reset vectors during the exception processing. Sadly, this
code will lead to an address error. When the CPU reads the stack
pointer from addresses $00000000 and $00000002 at the start of its
reset exception processing, it obtains $4E714E71. Unfortunately this
value is odd and generates an address exception. We need to use a
dummy op-code that is even to allow the CPU to free-run. One suitable
opcode is $0000 which corresponds to the instruction ORI.B #0,D0.

When a suitable op-code has been jammed into D00 to D15, the 68000
should free-run and a square wave observed on address pins A01 to A23.
The frequency at pin Ai should be one half of that at Ai-1.

Address Decoding (schematic page 3)
-----------------------------------

The specification for the TS2 CPU module calls for up to 32 Kbytes of
static RAM and up to 32 Kbytes of EPROM at the bottom of the
processor's 16-MByte address space, permitting up to eight
memory-mapped components, each occupying 64 bytes. The table below
gives the memory map of the TS2 CPU module.

  Size (bytes)  Device        Address Space
  ------------  ------        -----------------
 1   8          EPROM1        $00000000-$00000007
 2  16K         RAM1          $00000008-$00003FFF
 3  16K         RAM2          $00004000-$00007FFF
 4  16K         EPROM1        $00008000-$0000BFFF
 5  16K         EPROM2        $0000C000-$0000FFFF
 6  64          Peripheral 1  $01000000-$0100003F
 7  64          Peripheral 2  $01000040-$0100007F
 8  64          Peripheral 3  $01000080-$010000BF
 9  64          Peripheral 4  $010000C0-$010000FF
10  64          Peripheral 5  $01000100-$0100013F
11  64          Peripheral 6  $01000140-$0100017F
12  64          Peripheral 7  $01000180-$010001BF
13  64          Peripheral 8  $010001C0-$010001FF

The address decoding table corresponding to the memory map above is
given in the table below.

Device    A23 A22 ... A16 A15 A14 A13 A12 A11 A10 A09 A08 A07 A06 A05 A04 A03 A02 A01
 1 EPROM1  0  0   ...  0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   X   X
 2 RAM1    0  0   ...  0   0   0   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
 3 RAM2    0  0   ...  0   0   1   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
 4 EPROM1  0  0   ...  0   1   0   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
 5 EPROM2  0  0   ...  0   1   1   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
 6 PERI1   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   X   X   X   X   X
 7 PERI2   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   X   X   X   X   X
 8 PERI3   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   0   X   X   X   X   X
 9 PERI4   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   X   X   X   X   X
10 PERI5   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   0   0   X   X   X   X   X
11 PERI6   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   0   1   X   X   X   X   X
12 PERI7   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   0   X   X   X   X   X
13 PERI8   0  0   ...  1   0   0   0   0   0   0   0   1   1   1   X   X   X   X   X

A five-input NOR gate, U24A, generates an active-high output whenever
A19 to A23 are all low. Together with A18 and A17, this gate enables a
three line to eight line decoder, U26, that divides the lower 128
KBytes of memory space from $00000000 to $0001FFFF into eight blocks
of 16K. The first four blocks decode the address space for the
read/write memory and ROM. We deal with the selection of the reset
vector memory space in ROM later.

The active-low peripherals group select output of U26 (i.e. the
address range $00010000 to $00013FFF) enabled a second three line to
eight line decoder, U27. U27 is a 25LS2548 that has two active-low and
two active-high enable inputs. It also has an active-low
open-collector output, ACK*, that is asserted whenever the device is
enabled and strobed by a negative going pulse on its RD* or WR*
inputs.

U27 is also enabled by U24B, which is high when A09 to A13 are all
low, and by AS* from the CPU. Thus, whenever a valid address in the
range $00010000 to $000101FF appears on the address bus, one of U27's
active-low outputs is asserted, indicating a synchronous access to a
peripheral by asserting the processor's VPA* input. Note that this
arrangement is intended to be used in conjunction with 6800-series
peripherals.

An access to the reset vectors in the range $00000000 to $00000007 is
detected by gates U24A, U25A, U24B, U25B, U10C, and U19B. When the
output of each NOR gate is high, signifying a zero on A03 to A23, the
output of the NAND gate U19B, RV*, goes active-low. That is, RV* is
low whenever a reset vector is being accessed and is used to overlay
the exception table in read/write memory with the reset vectors in
ROM.

The address decoder on page 3 can be tested to a limited extent by
free-running the CPU and detecting decoding pulses at the outputs of
the address decoder. A better technique is to insert a test ROM and to
execute an infinite loop which periodically accesses the reset vector
space. This makes it easy to observe the operation of the circuit with
an oscilloscope.

RAM and ROM Address Select (schematic page 4)
---------------------------------------------

The selection of the individual RAM and EPROM components from the
address decoder outputs is carried out by the circuit of page 4.
Two-input OR gates combine one of the four device-select signals
(SEL0* to SEL3*) from the address decoder with the appropriate data
strobe (UDS* or LDS*) to produce the actual active-low chip-select
inputs to the eight memory components on the CPU module.

The circuit is also responsible for overlaying the reset vector space
onto the ROM memory space. When the RV* signal goes active-low while a
reset vector is being fetched, the read/write memory at $00000000 to
$00003FFF is disabled and the EPROM at $00008000 to $0000BFFF
substituted.

RAM and ROM  (schematic pages 5 and 6)
--------------------------------------

The use of 8Kx8 memory components permits the design of a memory with
a very low component count and virtually no design effort. Page 5
gives the design of half of the components of the CPU module -- the
others on page 6 (omitted in the Clements book) are arranged in
exactly the same fashion but are enabled by different chip-select
signals from the address decoder.

No further comment is required other than to point out that the EPROMs
have their active-low output enables (OE*) driven by R/W* from the
processor via an inverter. This action is necessary to avoid a bus
conflict if a write access is made to EPROM memory space.

The original design used 2764 ultraviolet-erasable EPROMs. It is also
compatible with 2864 electrically erasable EEPROMs. Either will work,
but the latter are more easily erased and programmed. It can also use
more modern CMOS memory devices (e.g. 27C64 and 28C64) which have
lower current consumption.

DTACK and BERR Control Circuitry  (schematic page 7)
----------------------------------------------------

Each memory access cycle begins with the assertion of AS* by the 68000
and ends with the assertion of DTACK* (or VPA*) by the addressed
device or with the assertion of BERR* by a watchdog timer. Schematic
page 7 gives the diagram of the DTACK* and BERR* control circuitry on
the CPU module.

Whenever a block of 16 KBytes of memory is selected on the CPU module,
one of the four select signals, SEL0* to SEL3*, goes active-low. The
output, MSEL, of the NAND gate U19A is then forced active-high. MSEL
becomes the ENABLE/LOAD* control input of a 74LS161 4-bit counter,
U22. When MSEL=0 (i.e. on-board memory is not accessed), the counter
is held in its load state and the data inputs on P0 to P3 are
preloaded into the counter, by default 1100. The desired preload value
can be set using DIP switches. The Q3 output from the counter is
gated, uninverted, through U10B and U7B to form the processor's DTACK*
input.

When MSEL goes high the counter is enabled. The counter is clocked
from the 68000's clock and counts upward from 1100. After four clock
pulses, the counter rolls over from 1111 to 0000 and Q3 (and therefore
DTACK*) goes low to provide the handshake required by the 68000 CPU.
At the end of the cycle, AS* is negated and MSEL goes low to preload
the counter with 1100 and negate DTACK*.

At the same time that U22 begins counting, a second timer, U21
(another 74LS161), also begins to count upward. The count clock is
taken from the 68000's E output which runs at CLK/10. This counter is
cleared to zero whenever AS* is negated. The rippled output from the
counter goes high after the fifteenth count from zero and is inverted
by the open-collector gate U4E to provide the CPU with a BERR* input.
Therefore, unless AS* is negated within 15 E-clock cycles of the start
of a bus cycle, BERR* is forced low to terminate the cycle. Note that
the counter is disabled (Cep=0) in the single-step mode (discussed
later) to avoid a spurious bus error exception.

A useful feature of the DTACK* circuit is the addition of a
single-step mode, allowing the execution of a single bus cycle (note
bus cycle, not instruction) each time a button is pushed. This
facility can be used to debug the system by freezing the state of the
processor.

One of the inputs to the OR gate U10B is INHIBIT_DTACK. If this is
active-high, the output of the OR gate is permanently true and the
generation of DTACK* by the DTACK* delay circuit is inhibited.
Therefore, a bus cycle remains frozen with AS* asserted, forcing the
CPU to generate an infinite stream of wait states.

Two positive-edge triggered D flip-flops, U20A and U23A, control
INHIBIT_DTACK. U20A acts as a debounced switch and produces an SS/RUN*
signal fro its Q output, depending only on the state of the
single-step/run switch. Unfortunately, it would be unwise to use the
output of U20A to inhibit DTACK*, because changing from run to
single-step mode in mid bus cycle might lead to unpredictable results.
Instead, the output of U20A is synchronized with AS* from the
processor by a second flip-flop, U23A. The INHIBIT_DTACK signal from
U23A is forced high only when AS* is negated at the end of a bus
cycle. The 68000 always enters its single-step mode at the start of a
new cycle before AS* is asserted.

In the single-step mode, DTACK* pulses are generated manually by
pressing the "step" switch. The output of this switch is debounced by
flip-flop U20B. A second flip-flop, U23B, generates a single,
active-low pulse, SS_DTACK*, each time the step button is pushed.
SS_DTACK* is gated in U7B to produce the DTACK* input needed to
terminate the current bus cycle.

There are two simple ways of testing the DTACK* control circuits. One
is in the free-run mode and is done by connecting, say, SEL0* to AS*,
so that a delayed DTACK* is produced for each bus cycle. The
single-step circuit can also be tested in this mode. Another procedure
is to construct a special test rig for the circuit, which simulates
the behavior of the 68000 by providing AS*, CLK, and SEL0* signals.

ACIAs  (schematic page 8)
-------------------------

The only I/O ports implemented on the TS2 CPU module are the two 6850
ACIAs shown on schematic page 8. The circuit is almost identical to
that found in the ECB module. One port is dedicated to the terminal
(IC U29 at address $00010040) and the other (IC U30 at address
$00010041) is dedicated to the host computer interface.

The baud rate can be selected by selecting the appropriate output of
the baud rate generator U31, but there is little reason to use a rate
lower than 9600 bps. The two ACIAs can also be run at different baud
rates if desired.

Omitted from my design is the serial port transparent mode feature of
the original TS2, also present on the ECB, which connected the
terminal interface directly to the host port whenever RTS from U29 was
high. This means that the TS2 monitor TRAN and TUTOR TM commands will
not operate correctly, but the transparent mode is of little use
unless the console is actually a dumb terminal rather than a host
computer.

If desired, the second (host) 6850 ACIA can be omitted as it is not
particularly useful. If the console port is connected to a computer,
files can be uploaded and downloaded through the console port.
Separate console and host ports made sense in the days of dumb
terminals, but today most terminal emulator programs can support file
transfers.

An error should be noted on the schematic on page 896 of the Clements
book. The chip selects for the ACIAs should be driven by the signal
CS_PERI2* and not CS_PERI1* as shown in the book.

My design also replaces the 1488 and 1489 RS-232 line drivers and
receivers with an FTDI connector to support FTDI USB to serial devices
rather than true RS-232, which would require the connected computer to
have RS-232 serial ports. This also removed the need for +12V and -12C
power supplies. It does have the limitation that the board cannot be
connected to true RS-232 serial ports.

Optionally, the board can be powered by USB using either of the FTDI
serial ports - a jumper needs to be connected on the port where power
is taken from (one or the other, but not both), in which case an
external power supply should not be used.

Interrupt Control Circuitry  (schematic page 9)
-----------------------------------------------

The interrupt control circuitry surrounding the 68000 is conventional.
A 74LS148 eight line to three line priority encoder, U28, converts the
seven levels of interrupt request input into a 3-bit code on IPL0* to
IPL2*. Note that each interrupt request input must have a pull-up
resistor, except IRQ7* which is always driven by U35A.

The function code from the 68000 is decoded by U32, a 74LS138, and the
resulting IACK* output is used to enable a second decoder, U33. U33 is
also strobed by AS* and converts the information on A01 to A03 during
an IACK cycle into one of seven levels of interrupt acknowledge output
(IACK1* to IACK7*). Other function code information supplied by U32
that may be useful in debugging the system in the "user/supervisor"
memory access codes and the "program/data" bus cycle codes.

The ABORT switch can generate a level 7 interrupt. This is present on
the ECB and with the TUTOR firmware can be used to interrupt program
execution. The switch is debounced by cross-coupled NAND gates U34A
and U34B and then clocks flip-flop U35A high (it has its data input
tied high). The Q* output of the flip-flop goes low, and is connected
to the IRQ7* input. Note that, unlike interrupts 1 through 6, a level
7 interrupt cannot be masked or disabled. During an interrupt
acknowledge cycle for a level 7 interrupt, IACK7* will go low and
clear the flip-flop. The IACK7* signal will also ripple through U7D,
U34C and U4F, driving VPA* low to indicate to the 68000 to perform an
autovectored interrupt operation. The CPU will then use the level 7
autovector interrupt address in RAM.

Interrupts 5 and 6 are connected to the two ACIAs, allowing interrupt
driven i/o to be performed if desired (the TS2 and TUTOR monitor
programs do not make use of this). These interrupts are used in the
same way on the Motorola ECB board. Like level 7, the interrupts are
also configured for autovectored operation. The relevant IACK5* or
IACK6* signal will go low and in turn drive VPA* low to perform
autovectored interrupt handling.

IRQ4* is also available and configured for autovectored operation.
Interrupts IRQ1* through IRQ3* are not -- they could be used with
vectored interrupts if external circuitry was added for this.

The interrupt circuitry can be tested from the TUTOR monitor. Pressing
the ABORT switch should generate a level 7 interrupt which will
produce a "SOFTWARE ABORT" message and register dump.

Pulling IRQ5* or IRQ6* low should cause TUTOR to produce "AV#5 TRAP
ERROR" and "AV#6 TRAP ERROR" messages, respectively. In order for this
to happen the interrupt mask in the status register must be set to
enable these interrupts.

Construction Notes
------------------

The prototype was wirewrapped on a phenolic board with 0.1" holes 6 by
9 inches in size.

Sockets were used for all ICs and most discrete components.

5 volt power connects to two binding posts. Optionally it can be
powered by USB. Current consumption is approximately 600 mA with all
ICs installed. The original TS2 also required +12V and -12V supplies,
but they are not required in my design.

Possible Future Enhancements
----------------------------

Ideas for a possible rev 2.x:

Printed circuit board.
Replace baud rate generator with fixed clock oscillator/counter.
Add one or two PIA, VIA, or PIT chips.
Optionally support line drivers/receivers for true RS-232 serial ports.
Add some connectors for external parallel i/o, interrupts, etc.
Use more common chip(s) in place of 25LS248 (could use A 74LS138 plus
a 74LS06 and another gate or two)
On-board 5 volt regulator/buck converter.
Support higher baud rates (through jumpers or software).
Add a seven segment LED display for diagnostics? (see Clements book
p.649 for possible approach)
Prototype area?
Support either RAM or EPROM/EEPROM in all sockets.
Optionally (jumper) allow EEPROM to be written to.
Support larger RAM and ROM chips (e.g. 27128, 27256, etc. Impacts memory map).
